{
    "title": "Each hour of outdoor work in India increased vitamin D levels by 2 nanograms",
    "slug": "each-hour-of-outdoor-work-in-india-increased-vitamin-d-levels-by-2-nanograms",
    "aliases": [
        "/Each+hour+of+outdoor+work+in+India+increased+vitamin+D+levels+by+2+nanograms+\u2013+March+2017",
        "/8447"
    ],
    "tiki_page_id": 8447,
    "date": "2017-05-18",
    "categories": [
        "Noontime sun and D",
        "UV and Vitamin D"
    ],
    "tags": [
        "Noontime sun and D",
        "UV and Vitamin D",
        "blood levels",
        "cancer",
        "dosage",
        "health risk",
        "pollution",
        "skin cancer",
        "vitamin d",
        "vitamin d blood test"
    ]
}


#### Vitamin D-binding protein, vitamin D status and serum bioavailable 25(OH)D of young Asian Indian males working in outdoor and indoor environments.

J Bone Miner Metab. 2017 Mar;35(2):177-184. [doi: 10.1007/s00774-016-0739-x.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00774-016-0739-x.) Epub 2016 Jan 30.

Goswami R1, Saha S2, Sreenivas V3, Singh N4, Lakshmy R5.

<div class="border" style="background-color:#FF9;padding:15px;margin:10px 0;border-radius:5px;width:800px">

Study of New Delhi workers in Aug-Sept

 **| | |
| --- | --- |
|  | Vitamin D |
| Outdoor | 29 ng |
| Indoor | 11 ng |** 

 **VitaminDWiki suspects that the men had dark skins and wore t-shirts or regular shirts** 

 **More vitamin D per hour can be expected if:** 

* Lighter skin

* Less clothing (see life-guards)

* Less air pollution 

* Only consider hours in the middle of the day 

> (when there is UVB to make Vitamin D)

 **Suspect indoor workers could also get a similar level of Vitamin D if one of the following** 

1. Take a 30 minute sunbreak daily at lunchtime while wearing a [|shirt which passes 50% of the UVB rays](/posts/increase-your-vitamin-d-from-the-sun-by-wearing-a-tan-through-instead-of-standard-shirt)

> (Do not start with full 30 minutes in the summer - which will cause sunbrun - start slowly)

1. Take a Vitamin D supplement - pehaps just one capsule every 2 weeks

#### See also VitaminDWiki

* [Most S. Calif lifeguards have good level of vitamin D (above 40 ng) - Aug 2016](/posts/most-s-calif-lifeguards-have-good-level-of-vitamin-d-above-40-ng)

* [Little Vitamin D generated by face and hands - June 2015](/posts/little-vitamin-d-generated-by-face-and-hands)

* [Why India's vitamin D deficiency is grim - 40 pages Feb 2014](/posts/why-indias-vitamin-d-deficiency-is-grim-40-pages)

* [Indoor workers have lower vitamin D levels than outdoor workers, unless lead smelter – June 2017](/posts/indoor-workers-have-lower-vitamin-d-levels-than-outdoor-workers-unless-lead-smelter)

* [Vitamin D level of outdoor workers in India was only 18 ng– May 2019](/posts/vitamin-d-level-of-outdoor-workers-in-india-was-only-18-ng)

* [High levels of Vitamin D and low rates of skin cancer among commercial fishermen – July 2019](/posts/high-levels-of-vitamin-d-and-low-rates-of-skin-cancer-among-commercial-fishermen)

* [Large variability in response to UV (more than response to oral Vitamin D) – March 2016](/posts/large-variability-in-response-to-uv-more-than-response-to-oral-vitamin-d)

* [Dark-skinned hunter-gatherers may generate 2,000 IU of vitamin D daily - June 2016](/posts/dark-skinned-hunter-gatherers-may-generate-2000-iu-of-vitamin-d-daily)

</div>

Urban Asian Indians generally have low serum 25(OH)D. Information on serum bioavailable 25(OH)D and the effect of prolonged sun-exposure in them is not known. We assessed serum 25(OH)D and bioavailable 25(OH)D in males with varying durations of sun-exposure in Delhi during  **August-September** . Serum 25(OH)D, vitamin D-binding protein (DBP), bioavailable 25(OH)D, free 25(OH)D index, iPTH, ionized calcium and sun-index were assessed in 

* outdoor, 

* mixed outdoor-indoor and 

* indoor workers (n = 88, 32 and 74, respectively). 

The mean sun-index (12.0 ± 6.25, 4.3 ± 2.20 and 0.7 ± 0.62, respectively; P < 0.001) was highest outdoors and lowest indoors. Serum 25(OH)D (29.0 ± 8.61, 19.1 ± 5.73 and 10.9 ± 4.19 ng/ml, respectively; P < 0.001), bioavailable 25(OH)D and free 25(OH)D index were maximum in outdoor workers followed by mixed-exposure and indoor workers. 

Their mean serum DBP levels (241.2 ± 88.77, 239.3 ± 83.40 and 216.6 ± 63.93 µg/ml, respectively; P = 0.12) were comparable. 

Mean serum iPTH was significantly lower in outdoor than indoor workers and showed inverse correlations with serum 25(OH)D, bioavailable 25(OH)D and free 25(OH)D index (r = -0.401, -0.269 and -0.236, respectively; P < 0.001 in all). 

Daily dietary-calorie intake was higher and calcium lower in outdoor than indoor workers. 

On regression analysis,  **sun-exposure was the only significant variable** , increasing serum 25(OH)D by  **2.03 ng/ml per hour of sun-exposure**  (95 % confidence interval 1.77-2.28; P < 0.001). Outdoor workers with prolonged sun-exposure were vitamin D-sufficient, with higher serum bioavailable 25(OH)D than the indoor workers during summer. Use of serum DBP levels did not affect the interpretation of their vitamin D status.

PMID: 26832389 DOI: 10.1007/s00774-016-0739-x