{
    "title": "One of the 4 vitamin D metabolites increases faster than the others",
    "slug": "one-of-the-4-vitamin-d-metabolites-increases-faster-than-the-others",
    "aliases": [
        "/One+of+the+4+vitamin+D+metabolites+increases+faster+than+the+others+\u2013+July+2012",
        "/3000"
    ],
    "tiki_page_id": 3000,
    "date": "2012-07-10",
    "categories": [
        "Tests for Vitamin D"
    ],
    "tags": [
        "Tests for Vitamin D",
        "autoimmune",
        "blood levels",
        "high dose",
        "intervention",
        "multiple sclerosis",
        "therapeutic intervention",
        "vitamin d",
        "vitamin d blood test"
    ]
}


#### Simultaneous quantification of four vitamin D metabolites in human serum using high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry for vitamin D profiling.

Clin Biochem. 2012 Jul 5. 

Baecher S, Leinenbach A, Wright JA, Pongratz S, Kobold U, Thiele R.

OBJECTIVES:

For quantification of 25-hydroxyvitamin D(3) (25OH-D(3)), 25-hydroxyvitamin D(2) (25OH-D(2)), 3-epi-25-hydroxyvitamin D(3) (3-epi-25OH-D(3)) and 24R,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) (24R,25(OH)(2)-D(3)) in human serum a high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) method was developed and validated.

DESIGN AND METHODS:

After protein precipitation further purification is achieved with on-line sample preparation using a reversed phase (RP) C-4 column. Chromatographic separation is realized by a RP-column with core shell material and pentafluorophenyl (PFP) selectivity. Atmospheric pressure chemical ionization in the positive ion mode with multi reaction monitoring is used for analyte detection.

RESULTS:

Baseline separation of the analytes is achieved below ten minutes. 

The method is linear over the range 

* 4.0 - 265.3nmol/L for 25OH-D(3), 

* 3.9 - 183.6nmol/L for 25OH-D(2), 

* 2.0 - 133.8nmol/L for 3-epi-25OH-D(3) and 

* 2.8 - 129.9nmol/L for 24R,25(OH)(2)-D(3) (r(2) >0.998). 

The limit of quantification is 4.0nmol/L for 25OH-D(3), 3.9nmol/L for 25OH-D(2), 2.0nmol/L for 3-epi-25OH-D(3) and 2.8nmol/L for 24R,25(OH)(2)-D(3). The CVs for the intra-day and inter-day precision are <5% and <4%, respectively. Metabolite levels for a set of 50 human serum samples have been determined and resulted in the detection of considerable amounts of 3-epi-25OH-D(3) and 24R,25(OH)(2)-D(3).

CONCLUSIONS:

This highly specific HPLC-MS/MS method is suitable for vitD profiling. 

There is a correlation between 25OH-D(3) and 24R,25(OH)(2)-D(3). 

Serum concentration of 24R,25(OH)(2)-D(3) increases disproportionally with increasing concentration of 25OH-D(3).

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22771503

---

 **Comment by VitaminDWiki Recall that there are many photoproducts generated by the skin, not just Vitamin D3**